# Upgrading ubuntu 22.04 to 24.04? Disable lock screen!

Another lesson I learned the hard way.  I wanted to upgrade my Ubuntu 22.04 linux system to 24.04. What could go wrong?

### executive summary

The lock screen.  The lock screen can go wrong.

### upgrade process

Wow, this turned into a nightmare because the screen lock appeared during the upgrade, go figure.  Doing some searching this apparently happens a lot and it seems there is a slightly different solution in each case, thus this blog post.  I finally found the instructions in [4], and that pretty much got me going.  Next time, hopefully I'll remember to disable screen locking first.  It would be nice if the instructions on the ubuntu site said that if it was going to be a problem, or god forbid, if the upgrade script disabled the lock screen for you.  

Anyway, I started out following the instructions for upgrading from 22.04 to 24.04 at [1 and 2].

- started by trying to back up home directory to usb drive (external hard drive is not a valid format), this eventually failed because there is so much jetbrains and chrome garbage under the home directory
- instead created a zipped tarfile and copied it to the usb drive
- Updated the OS using: sudo apt update && sudo apt full-upgrade
- reboot
- running the system OS updater from the desktop app reports that an upgrade to 24.04 and asks if I'd like to upgrade, answering yes seems to have no effect
- tried running "sudo do-release-upgrade" but it fails saying all OS updates must be applied, which I just did
- apt reports that mongo can be upgrade from 8.06 to 8.09 so I did that following [3], basically install the new version and it upgrades because already installed
- re-run "sudo do-release-upgrade", which this time ran successfully
- resolved some config file diffs reported by the upgrade script
- resolve issue where screensaver appeared during upgrade and i couldn't get back to the upgrade console [4]

### lock screen issue

I stepped away briefly while the upgrade script was running, and the lock screen appeared.  At that point, I knew I was in trouble but kept my fingers crossed.  I returned a couple hours later, and the screen was still locked, and I was unable to enter my password (the cursor would appear and quickly disappear in the password box).

I found a few interesting suggestions for solving this problem that didn't work for me, including using "screen" to reattach the tty (screen wasn't installed and couldn't be because dpkg was locked", and using "loginctl" to unlock the session. Ultimately, the instructions for link [4] helped get me going.  Here is roughly what I did:

- login to a console by ctrl-alt-F3
- checked /var/log/dpkglog, which hadn't been updated in a couple of hours
- did "ps awwux | grep do-release-upgrade" to find and "kill -9" process for release script
- ran "sudo dpkg --configure -a" to finish off the apt package upgrades, which were a lot
- "sudo apt update ; sudo apt full-upgrade" to do any more updates, did a bunch of stuff
- "sudo apt install ubuntu-desktop^" because why not, did a bunch of stuff
- "sudo apt -f install" for completeness which did nothing
- "sudo apt full-upgrade" for additional completeness, which also did nothing and made me feel like it was time to:
- "reboot"

The system booted normally, and took me to a lock screen whose password box DID work.  After logging in, I checked System -> System Details on the settings app, and it showed Ubuntu 22.04.2 LTS as the OS Name.  I'm guessing I'm going to run into some issues for the config files that I had customized but allowed the new config file to overwrite - they seemed to be things I barely remember like the HP printer driver, some stuff for hibernating when closing the lid, enabling my Apple SuperDrive when plugged in to USB, etc.  I made notes of the old config settings that were being overwritten in hopes that I can add them back later if I need them.

### links
[1] https://documentation.ubuntu.com/server/how-to/software/upgrade-your-release/index.html
[2] https://9to5linux.com/you-can-now-upgrade-ubuntu-22-04-lts-to-ubuntu-24-04-lts-heres-how
[3] https://www.mongodb.com/docs/manual/tutorial/install-mongodb-on-ubuntu/
[4] https://askubuntu.com/questions/1455036/screen-lock-error-during-upgrade-to-22-04-from-20-04
